# Generating OpenAPI documentation

To use, add the following dependencies:

```scala
"com.softwaremill.sttp.tapir" %% "tapir-openapi-docs" % "0.12.25"
"com.softwaremill.sttp.tapir" %% "tapir-openapi-circe-yaml" % "0.12.25"
```

Tapir contains a case class-based model of the openapi data structures in the `openapi/openapi-model` subproject (the
model is independent from all other tapir modules and can be used stand-alone).
 
An endpoint can be converted to an instance of the model by importing the `tapir.docs.openapi._` package and calling 
the provided extension method:

```scala
import sttp.tapir.openapi.OpenAPI
import sttp.tapir.docs.openapi._

val docs: OpenAPI = booksListing.toOpenAPI("My Bookshop", "1.0")
```

Such a model can then be refined, by adding details which are not auto-generated. Working with a deeply nested case 
class structure such as the `OpenAPI` one can be made easier by using a lens library, e.g. [Quicklens](https://github.com/adamw/quicklens).

Quite often, you'll need to define the servers, through which the API can be reached. To do this, you can modify the
returned `OpenAPI` case class either directly or by using a helper method:

```scala
val docs: OpenAPI = booksListing.toOpenAPI("My Bookshop", "1.0")
  .servers(List(Server("https://api.example.com/v1").description("Production server")))
```

Multiple endpoints can be converted to an `OpenAPI` instance by calling the extension method on a list of endpoints:

```scala
List(addBook, booksListing, booksListingByGenre).toOpenAPI("My Bookshop", "1.0")
```

The openapi case classes can then be serialised, either to JSON or YAML using [Circe](https://circe.github.io/circe/):

```scala
import sttp.tapir.openapi.circe.yaml._

println(docs.toYaml)
```

## Options

Options can be customised by providing an implicit instance of `OpenAPIDocsOptions`, when calling `.toOpenAPI`.

* `operationIdGenerator`: each endpoint corresponds to an operation in the OpenAPI format and should have a unique 
  operation id. By default, the `name` of endpoint is used as the operation id, and if this is not available, the 
  operation id is auto-generated by concatenating (using camel-case) the request method and path.

## Exposing OpenAPI documentation

Exposing the OpenAPI documentation can be very application-specific. However, tapir contains modules which contain
akka-http/http4s routes for exposing documentation using [Swagger UI](https://swagger.io/tools/swagger-ui/) or 
[Redoc](https://github.com/Redocly/redoc):

```scala
"com.softwaremill.sttp.tapir" %% "tapir-swagger-ui-akka-http" % "0.12.25"
"com.softwaremill.sttp.tapir" %% "tapir-redoc-akka-http" % "0.12.25"
"com.softwaremill.sttp.tapir" %% "tapir-swagger-ui-http4s" % "0.12.25"
"com.softwaremill.sttp.tapir" %% "tapir-redoc-http4s" % "0.12.25"
```

Note: `tapir-swagger-ui-akka-http` transitively pulls some Akka modules in version 2.6. If you want to force
your own Akka version (for example 2.5), use sbt exclusion.  Mind the Scala version in artifact name:

```scala
"com.softwaremill.sttp.tapir" %% "tapir-swagger-ui-akka-http" % "0.12.25" exclude("com.typesafe.akka", "akka-stream_2.12")
```

Usage example for akka-http:

```scala
import sttp.tapir.docs.openapi._
import sttp.tapir.openapi.circe.yaml._
import sttp.tapir.swagger.akkahttp.SwaggerAkka

val docsAsYaml: String = myEndpoints.toOpenAPI("My App", "1.0").toYaml
// add to your akka routes
new SwaggerAkka(docsAsYaml).routes
```

For redoc, use `RedocAkkaHttp`. 

For http4s, use the `SwaggerHttp4s` or `RedocHttp4s` classes.
